[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi, I'm Ashleigh Sergeant,
and welcome to "Everyday
Enlightenment," your go-to show
for insights and practical tips
on how to live a conscious
life in the midst of your busy
schedule.
Many of us have heard
that poor posture
is related to things like
chronic pain, headaches,
and fatigue.
In the past, fitness
culture has taught us
that regular exercise and
stretching is a key component
to good posture.
But what does good
posture really mean?
And how do we attain and
sustain such a state?
Modern scientific discoveries
in the fields of anatomy,
and biomechanics, and movement
disciplines-- like yoga,
Pilates and Tai chi--
reveal that posture is not
simply a physical concept.
But rather, part of a much
broader and much more intricate
combination of things going
on between our body and mind.
Today, I'm here
with Ben Stewart--
film maker and musician,
turned movement specialist.
Ben studies the science and art
of natural movement and body
communication as a pathway
to awakening to our highest
human potential.
Ben, thank you for
being here today.
>> Thank you so much for
having me on the show.
>> Now, this is a
exciting topic for me.
I love to talk about movement.
And I said in the opening
that, like modern science
is saying that it's
obvious that it's not just
this physical thing--
posture-- but it's not
really very modern at all.
And I know you have a lot of
concepts about that, as well.
>> I think that
most of the time,
posture has been thought of as
just getting comfortable so you
can sit for long
periods of time.
And that's definitely
a big aspect of it,
but that kind of glosses
over the importance of what
a good posture can
actually do for you.
And what it opens
up inside the body.
So that's what I've been
interested in the most is
finding the most practical ways
to reach some of those higher,
more artistic or loftier
cognitive functions
that we have.
>> And so what I'm
hearing you say is--
and I think what we've heard in
our culture in different ways--
is that like good posture
equals better or X thing.
What does it do for us,
actually-- good posture?
And what does that really mean?
>> So it's involved because I
think all these disciplines--
at least, for me--
it's self-discovery.
What are you learning
about yourself?
A lot of people think good
posture is one size fits all.
So everybody has to have the
same curvature in their spine.
Everybody has to look the
same as they're standing.
And as much as you know
if you have all four limbs
and you have a head on
top your shoulders, then
we look fairly similar.
But we all have different form.
And our form is actually
telling us a lot about the path
that we've had.
And not just our own physical
path, but our lineage--
our parents and
what our ancestors
have passed down to us.
So the body is a lot
more metaphorical
than I think we
give it credit for.
Today, we have a
very scientific--
we'll only talk about what can
be proven by modern technology.
But really, by
looking at the body
and respecting it for what it
is, it's an ancient technology.
It's been perfecting
itself for eons.
And if you think about
it, it's configured
in a very intricate way.
Leonardo da Vinci was trying to
show that in his Vitruvian Man.
So there's something
very artistic
and telling about the body.
And I believe that all
of our ancient ancestral
baggage that we
might carry-- even
the baggage from this
life, our trauma,
our injuries-- they all show up
in a very symbolic and artistic
way in our body.
And that makes it
more fun and more
engaging to be able to go back
into, what is our posture?
Where are we at now?
We start there and
then we start moving
in the direction of
not just healing,
but healing will be
the emergent quality
of coming back into alignment
with where is our center?
Where is our center of movement
and our center of gravity?
>> I love that because I'm
a huge proponent of really
empowering people into
their own healing.
This concept-- and it has
been very much brought about
in Western culture and with
the emergence of the field
of science--
which is only a couple
hundred years old, really--
this idea that we need
to look outward or get
information from something,
someone else, some other system
to tell us exactly how
we are supposed to be.
What is center for us.
What is healing for us.
What is actually balance
and freedom for us.
And I think that there's
a lot of actual trauma
or a lot of suffering
even within that model
because there's this
concept of trying to strive
and perfect something that
maybe isn't even attainable.
Or isn't even the thing that
is beneficial for my body
versus your body.
Or my whole system versus
your system or someone else's.
And that really starting
to put the power back
into the individual
for us-- starting
to really learn to listen.
>> You hit the nail on
the head right there.
For me, this is all fractal.
So the way our body communicates
is in a fractal way.
When something is
happening inside our body,
the entire body is
actually responding to that
and compensating for it.
So there's these balancing
acts that happen.
And what you mentioned
about science
is totally true because
we live in a culture that
has a cultural mindset.
And all cultural
mindsets have the threat
of becoming very rigid.
And in a sense, building
economic models and things
that are very rigid around
an idea that-- like you
said-- only a couple
of hundred years old.
This modern reductionist--
if our science and technology
can't prove it, then
it doesn't exist--
that's neglecting
the fact that we--
can we even wrap our heads
around what reality truly is?
So with culture,
there's also a posture
that you hold in your
community, as well.
So if your culture is holding
this very reductionist
rigid way of
thinking, then it is,
basically, it's our
duty to balance that,
if we feel that
balance is needed.
And it's the same thing with
both hemispheres of the body.
We are symmetrical.
And we have two
hemispheres of the body.
And let's say-- for instance--
I broke my right
ankle when I was 12
and it was right
on a growth plate.
I had to work very hard
not to have this leg always
flop out as I'm walking.
So there is this
asynchrony that was
building because this leg
was getting much smaller.
So I had to then,
work on my gait cycle
and how I walk because the more
that I realized as I got later
and I started looking at
what can a improper gait
cycle actually do to you--
it actually affects you all
the way up into the inside
of your cranium.
basically.
You have this sphenoid bone
and it looks like an owl.
If you were to take off
the front part of the face,
it's this thing that
when you're walking,
it actually like
moves back and forth--
or it even flaps its wings.
And that houses the pituitary
gland and the pineal gland.
And so not having a proper
gait cycle or a walking form,
actually can degrade
the operation
of the pituitary gland,
which is the master gland.
So your hormonal
balance, your attitude,
your way of perceiving yourself.
The way that you actually even--
how much potential you
think you even have.
How much impact in the
world or in your culture you
believe you have--
can be actually
affected very, very much
so just by improper walking.
So we all have injuries.
We all have trauma.
And we have trauma--
you go into these contractions,
like your body contracts
in the same way that
electricity going into tissue
makes it contract.
It's the same thing as an
overwhelming situation.
And when that happens,
your body will
go into a certain
contracting pattern.
And then the next time another
kind of trauma or fright
happens and you'll likely go
back to that same path of least
resistance.
So now it's symbolic,
but it has nothing to do
with what's actually going on--
the scare that you just had.
So I like to look at the
body is it's an art form.
And it's actually
speaking symbolically.
Because it doesn't have
the English language,
it speaks completely different.
So what I believe
this is all about
is our relationships--
coming back
in a relationship with the body.
Listening to it.
In symbolic form,
what is it telling us
about how we are
holding ourselves?
Because your posture
says everything.
This posture says a lot.
So there's all these little
things where posture actually
informs your conscious state.
>> And you're really
conscious about your posture.
And you're also-- even just the
idea of I'm sitting like this
or I'm sitting like this.
Some of us don't even
know to think of that.
And I think this is
a really key piece.
And to go back to your point
on the ancestry piece--
sometimes the things that we
have going on in our body,
they actually come
to us as we are born.
What I hear you say--
you just have this curiosity
and this excitement about wow,
this is really cool about
this bone inside of our head.
This is really cool about the
way my body reacts to this.
That cultivating this
curiosity around it I think
is a really powerful
access point
in to know that if
these patterns are there
and they haven't really
healed themselves
or work themselves out--
how do we start
to work with them?
And how does that start
to change our state?
Because I think that's the piece
that can be the hook of like,
I can get curious about this.
But why?"
How can this change my state?
>> And you brought up a
bunch of really good points.
Trauma, injury--
these things happen.
And I believe that they
happen for a very good reason.
If we were always in a state of
equanimity, we wouldn't learn.
And so that's not
the point here.
We're meant to find our balance.
But life is also meant to
throw us off balance that way,
we can keep finding
our way back to balance
from all these nuance
different imbalances.
And so I think that
the inspiration
that you're speaking about--
that's really the best
part of this is because--
I'm an artist at heart.
So I use research as an element
or a color in a grand painting
or a grand masterpiece.
Whereas, a lot of people--
they need it proven to them
first before they start moving.
To me-- as an artist--
the body is already
speaking to you.
We already have a
relationship with it.
And nobody else-- you don't need
external validation to say this
is what your body
is telling you.
You can listen to people.
You can maybe allow
that to inform
how you listen to your body.
But really, you're the
best expert on your body.
I'm the best on mine.
And this is the
brilliance of that.
So coming back into good
posture-- what does that mean?
That really means
that we wish to have
a bit more of an optimal state.
We wish to have more balance.
We wish to have maybe less
stress-- all these things that
are typified by our
culture, causes of stress
and we want less stress.
Our job causes us injuries
so we want less injury.
It's these circumstances
that we can overcome,
but the thing is that we're
cultivating the desire
to surmount.
To actually overcome them.
So that's the beauty of it.
So it's actually
looking at the body
and looking at posture
as an art form that's
constantly teaching us.
And once you overcome something,
once you wake up to something--
you don't need that alarm
bell to keep ringing.
You need to move
on from that point.
So that's really the
brilliance of it.
It's not hanging
onto these old things
and really, it doesn't
matter where the injury truly
came from.
You can still work on it.
Because I've forgotten some
of the emotional traumas
and some of the
little things that I
experienced as a little kid,
but it's here in my body.
So I'm not working on
me as a little kid,
I'm working on the
body that I have now.
And coming back into center.
How does it change our state?
Well, we know that
moving the body
and actually giving it
challenge and giving it risk
is actually a way to
enter the flow state.
So the Flow Genome Project
is talking about here's
your comfort level
of a certain task.
If you go 4% more,
then you're already
triggering the flow state.
So challenge and
risk are two things
that trigger a different
altered state of consciousness
that I believe is actually
accessing what you would call
the quantum realm inside you.
And that's a realm of
really, pure magic.
So there's a lot of things
that quantum physics
is breaking down of the
old science, the old idea
that we've come from where
everything is so rigid.
So the body-- it wants to learn.
And it does that by
being thrown off balance,
coming back into balance.
So I say, the best thing
that we can actually do--
the states that we can
find ourselves in--
is finding what the
body is telling us.
Looking at our posture.
Not harping on ourselves or
getting down on ourselves
because our posture
isn't perfect.
You start where you are.
You forgive yourself
for all of the past.
You forgive your parents
and everybody who you feel
has wronged you.
And you start in this moment
to move back in the direction,
back in the trajectory
of what you feel balanced
and what you for your health is.
So it is really a personal
journey for each of us.
And the body is--
it's our guide.
It really is our guide.
It's whispering to
us in symbolic form.
And if we learn how
to listen to that,
we are the ones that
are meeting it halfway.
So us actually consciously
changing our posture,
us actually consciously
changing the way
that we move into a more
intelligent, graceful manner--
that's where we're really going
to start hearing the deeper
messages of life that
don't speak God's not
going to peek through the
clouds and actually tell you
the secrets.
This is the riddle.
This is the enigma.
So if we listen to
it, it will actually
reveal its secrets to us.
But there is the key.
All relationships-- your lovers,
your children, your family,
nature in general--
you have to listen to come into
a better relationship with it.
Force does not work.
Ignoring it does not work.
You have to meet it
halfway, actually listen.
And this will change
your conscious state
and actually bring
you into a state
where you feel confident that
you can listen to the body
and it's actually giving
you the tips and clues
to move towards
healing and wholeness.
>> I love this because we've
heard a lot that meditation can
start to calm the mind.
And that calming the mind
can start to relieve stress.
Can start to relieve pain.
And I think an important piece
that we shouldn't overlook
is that also, by moving
in more conscious ways
and actually being in the
body in more conscious ways--
also works the mind
and comes the mind.
That it can work
in both directions.
So I'd love to have you show
us a couple of things about,
how can we start
to learn to listen?
How can we start to change
these states and tune
into this deeper wisdom that
our body is offering us?
>> Absolutely.
[WHOOSH]
First thing I'll have us do is
just check in with our posture.
Before we correct
anything, I want
us to be able to listen to
what the body's actually saying
and develop that kind
of a relationship.
And this is something
we should really
be doing throughout the
day is checking in with how
we're holding ourselves.
And remember that it's
symbolic towards how we feel.
And what we're actually
giving back out.
So the first thing is
if you're sitting--
instead of resting
against the back,
just come up a little bit.
And then adopt just a relaxed
or a slouching position.
You could even put
the hand on the legs,
but just relax into this.
Listen to the body.
Start feeling how
your breath feels.
Is it restricted in any way
because of this posture?
Now start checking in
with parts of your body--
maybe your pelvis.
Maybe your back-- that's
doing all the work
and holding this posture.
Where is all the
work being done?
And just check in
with those places.
Keep breathing.
And now, I want you to link it
to something emotional-- maybe
a strained relationship,
or a feeling
of inadequacy, a lack of
self-confidence-- whatever
it might be.
And link it to something
that's very real
and present for you lately.
Does it come up at
all in your body?
Does it feel like it
is housed or located
in any specific place?
And just keep
checking in with it.
We don't have to shame it.
We don't have to make it seem
like it's a problem, an issue.
It just is what it is.
We're already living with
it so it is what it is.
Now, we're letting
it express itself.
We're listening to it.
And the more you breathe and
just check in with your body,
just see where your
attention goes naturally.
And once you've come
to a state where
you feel like you've actually
received some kind of message
and then remember-- you've
already received the message.
It's just not in a language
that you fully understand.
And this is where the
creativity comes in.
So once you get to that
place where you feel that
you've received the message--
whether you can put it
into words or not--
then I'd invite you
to sit up straight.
Just whatever that means to
you because sitting up straight
also means something
different to everybody.
And as you're sitting
straight, the first thing
I want you to do is just
roll each shoulder back one
at a time.
And then just see how your
shoulder sits at that point.
And then I want you to lift
your chin just a little bit,
just so you're not bringing
your neck down to your chest.
Just lift your chin
up a little bit
and just feel the position
of your spine, now.
Check in with your breath.
How does it feel now?
Is it as restricted as it
was when you were slouching?
Do you feel like you
have more expansiveness?
How does it feel?
Those spots in your body that
were holding your slouching
posture--
how do they feel now?
Just check in.
Nothing's right,
nothing's wrong.
It just is what it is
and it's speaking to you.
Now I want you to check back in
with that emotional component--
that strained relationship
or whatever it was.
That feeling of self-doubt.
Just check in with it.
See how that feeling,
that idea, or concept
fits with this new posture.
And you're going to have
to sit with it a bit.
And it may not
make perfect sense
right now-- that's why I
invite you to do this daily.
Do it in the morning.
Do it in the middle of the
day when you feel stressed.
When you're on the phone.
When you're standing
talking to somebody.
When you're sitting in
front of the computer.
Just check in with your
posture, like you are now,
and just see how it feels.
And see if you
can find some kind
of link between your posture
and your emotional state.
Is your posture informing
your emotional state?
And just keep breathing
and keep listening.
And once you've come to a place
where you feel like you've
received the message--
again, whether you can
put it in words or not--
just sit with it.
And I want you to
acknowledge it and thank it
for exactly what it is.
There's no shaming.
The only forgiveness
is in the fact
that we've been fighting
against all these messages.
They're holding themselves
in the body somehow
and we've been
fighting against it.
All we need to do
now is surrender.
It's very simple.
Just a breath.
Fall in love with that exhale--
that's what sends you
into a parasympathetic,
more calm nervous system.
And just check in with
your body one more time.
And now, the last thing that
I'm going to leave you with
is really, now that
we have found a way
to enhance our way of
listening to the body--
just a few simple
things that many people
don't think of when it comes
to, what is a correct posture?
Most of the time, our
abdomen is not engaged
and that is one of the things
our diaphragm and our abdomen
actually holds our
spine straight.
And when our spine
is not straight,
that channel is not
sending information
properly because all
the information goes
from the connective
tissues of the body
to the cranial sacral system.
And all of that information
is sent straight to brain,
straight to the mind.
And I want you to check in now,
with how your neck actually
feels seated on
top of the spine.
Is it imbalanced?
Is it leaning to one
side or the other?
Does it feel strained?
Just check in.
So all we're going to do is
just make a quick adjustment.
And it has to be super simple
for you to remember it.
Just slightly bring
in your abdomen--
as if you're on the beach and
you're sucking in that gut.
And just feel how that actually
holds and supports your spine.
And then I want you to
check in with your pelvis.
How is all of this stacking
on top of your pelvis?
And two little adjustments--
bring the chest up
just a little bit.
And then bring it back down.
And just breathe
in one more time.
And then let it go, again.
So what we're
checking in with here
is this symbolic language
of the body, of the posture.
And movement-- it's the
same thing with movement.
As you're walking
throughout the day,
you don't need to know what
the scientists and what
the professionals are saying
about what correct posture is.
All you need to do
is check in with you.
And check in with
how it's making you
feel on an emotional,
psychological level.
If it's causing anxiety
or if it's relieving it.
This is listening
to your body talk
because your body is
always talking to you.
And the more you do this--
in the same way
that you just have
to be present with your
lovers, with your children,
with your friends,
and your family--
you have to keep showing up.
And keep checking in
with them to strengthen
that relationship.
It's the same thing
with your body,
and your body is waiting for
you to come into a better
relationship with it.
So I hope that this-- even
though it may not seem like
you've done much--
what you're really doing is
less of a physical manipulation
and more of a listening act.
You're learning how to
actually quiet the mind
and listen to the subtle things
that the body are telling you.
And I promise you,
if you do this--
if you come into a better
relationship with your body,
it will open up all those
secrets, all those questions,
all those mysteries
of life that you
keep racking your brain about.
And it will improve
your potential
to be the best you
that you can be.
>> Awesome, Ben.
Thank you so much.
Becoming more aware of
our bodies and everything
that we do--
so important.
>> Thanks for allowing me
to share with your audience.
>> Thanks for being here.
And thank you for joining us.
Until next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]